what's one thing that every person in
this room is going to become older and
most of us are scared stiff at the
prospect how does that word make you
feel I used to feel the same way what
was I'm most worried about ending up
drooling in some grim institutional
hallway and then I learned that only 4%
of older Americans are living in nursing
homes and the percentage is dropping
what else was I worried about dementia
turns out that most of us can think just
fine to the end dementia rates are
dropping too
the real epidemic is anxiety over memory
loss I also figured that old people were
depressed because they were old and they
were going to die soon it turns out that
the longer people live or less they fear
dying and the people are happiest at the
beginnings and the ends of their lives
it's called the you curve of happiness
and it's been borne out by dozens of
studies around the world you don't have
to be a Buddhist or a billionaire the
curve is a function of the way aging
itself affects the brain so I started
feeling a lot better about getting older
and I started obsessing about why so few
people know these things
the reason is ageism discrimination and
stereotyping on the basis of age we
experience it anytime someone assumes
were too old for something instead of
finding out who we are and what we're
capable of or too young ageism cuts both
ways
all isms are socially constructed ideas
racism sexism homophobia and that means
we make them up and they can change over
time all these prejudices pit us against
each other to maintain the status quo
like Auto Workers in the US competing
against auto workers in Mexico instead
of organizing for better wages we we
know it's not okay to allocate resources
by race or by sex why should it be okay
the way
the needs of the young against the old
all prejudice relies on other in seeing
a group of people as other than
ourselves are their race of a religion
other nationality the strange thing
about ageism that other is us ageism
feeds on denial our reluctance to
acknowledge that we are going to become
that older person its denial when we try
to pass for younger or when we believe
in anti-aging products or when we feel
like our bodies are betraying us simply
because they are changing why on earth
do we stop celebrating the ability to
adapt and grow as we move through life
why should a geing well mean struggling
to look and move like younger versions
of ourselves
it's embarrassing to be called out as
older until we quit being embarrassed
about it and it's not healthy to go
through life threating our futures the
sooner we get off this hamster wheel of
age denial the better off we are
stereotypes are always a mistake of
course but especially when it comes to
age because the longer we live the more
different from one another we become
right think about it and yet we tend to
think of everyone in a retirement home
as the same age old when they can spans
for decades
can you imagine thinking that way about
a group of people between the ages of 20
and 60 when you get to a party the ahead
for people your own age
have you ever grumbled about entitled
Millennials have you ever rejected a
haircut or a relationship or an outing
because it's not age-appropriate
for adults there's no such thing all
these behaviors are ageist we all do
them and we can't challenge bias unless
we're aware of it nobody's born ages but
it starts in early childhood around the
same time attitudes towards race and
gender start to form because negative
messages about late life bombard us from
the media and popular culture at every
turn
right wrinkles are ugly old people are
pathetic it's sad to be old look at
Hollywood a survey of recent Best
Picture nominations found that only 12%
of speaking or named characters were age
60 and up and many of them were for
trait is impaired older people can be
the most aegis of all because we've had
a lifetime to internalize these messages
and we've never thought to challenge
them
I had to acknowledge it and stop
colluding senior moment grips for
example I stopped making them when it
dawned on me that when I lost the car
keys in high school I didn't call it a
junior moment like I stopped blaming my
sore knee on being 64 my other knee
doesn't hurt and it's just as old we are
all worried about some aspect of getting
older where they're running out of money
getting sick ending up alone and those
fears are legitimate and real what what
never dawned on most of us is that the
experience of reaching old age can be
better or worse depending on the culture
in which it takes place it is not having
a vagina that makes life harder for
women it's sexism it's not loving a man
that makes life harder for gay guys it's
homophobia and it is not the passage of
time that makes getting older so much
harder than it has to be it is ageism
when labels are hard to read or there's
no handrail or we can't open the damn
jar we blame ourselves our failure to
age successfully instead of the ageism
that makes those natural transitions
shameful and the discrimination that
makes those barriers acceptable you
can't make money off satisfaction but
shame and fear create markets and
capitalism always needs new markets who
says wrinkles are ugly the multi-billion
dollar skin care industry who says
perimenopause and blow tea and mild
cognitive impairment are medical
conditions the trillion dollar
pharmaceutical industry the more clearly
we see these forces at work the easier
it is to come up with alternatives more
positive and more accurate narratives
aging is not a problem to be fixed or a
disease to be cured
it is a natural powerful lifelong
process that unites us all changing the
culture is a tall order I know that but
culture is fluid look at how much the
position of women has changed in my
lifetime
or the incredible strides that the gay
rights movement has made in just a few
decades right look at gender we used to
think of it as a binary male of female
and now we understand it's a spectrum it
is high time to ditch the old young
binary - there is no line in the sand
between old and young after which it's
all downhill and the longer we wait to
challenge that idea the more damage it
does to ourselves and our place in the
world like in the workforce where age
discrimination is rampant in Silicon
Valley engineers are getting Botox and
hair plugs before key interviews and
these are skilled white men in their 30s
so imagine the effects further down the
food chain the personal and economic
consequences are devastating not one
stereotype about older workers holds up
under scrutiny companies aren't
adaptable and creative because their
employees are young they're adaptable
and creative despite it companies we
know that diverse companies aren't just
better places to work they work better
and just like race and sex age as a
criterion for diversity a growing body
of fascinating research shows that
attitudes towards aging affect how our
minds and bodies function at the
cellular level when we talk to older
people like this or call them sweetie or
young lady
it's called elders speak they appear to
instantly age walking and talking less
competently people with more positive
feelings towards aging walk faster they
do better on memory tests they heal
quicker and they live longer even with
brains full of plaques and tangles some
people stayed sharp to the end what did
they have in common a sense of purpose
and what's the biggest obstacle to
having a sense of purpose in late life a
culture that tells us that getting older
means shuffling off stage that's why the
World Health Organization is developing
a global anti ageism initiative to
extend not just lifespan but health span
women experience the double whammy of
ageism and sexism so we experience aging
differently there's a double standard at
work here shocker
the notion that aging enhances men and
devalues women women reinforce this
double standard when we compete to stay
young another punishing and losing
proposition does any woman in this room
really believe that she is a lesser
version less interesting less fun in bed
less valuable than the woman she once
was this discrimination affects our
health our well-being and our income and
the effects add up over time they're
further compounded by race and by class
which is why everywhere in the world the
poorest of the poor are old women of
color what's the takeaway from that map
by 2050 one out of five of us almost 2
billion people will be age 60 and up
longevity is a fundamental hallmark of
human progress all these older people
represent a vast unprecedented and
untapped market and yet capitalism and
urbanization have propelled age bias
into every corner of the globe from
Switzerland where olders fare the best
to Afghanistan which sits at the bottom
of the global H watch index path of the
world's countries aren't mentioned on
that list because we don't bother to
collect data on almost 2 million people
because they're no longer young almost
two-thirds of people over 60 around the
world say they have trouble accessing
health care almost three-quarters say
their income doesn't cover basic
services like food water electricity and
decent housing is this the world we want
our children who may well live to be a
hundred to inherit everyone all ages all
genders all nationalities is old or
future old and unless we put an end to
it ageism will oppress us all and that
makes it a perfect target for collective
advocacy why add another ISM to the list
when so many racism in particular call
out for action here's the thing we don't
have to choose when we make the world a
better place to grow old in we make it a
better place in which to be from
somewhere else to have a disability to
be queer to be non rich to be non-white
and when we show up at all ages
for whatever cause matters most to us
save the whales save the democracy we
not only make that effort more effective
we dismantle ageism in the process
longevity is here to stay a movement to
end ageism is underway I'm in it and I
hope you will join me
[Applause]